To improve the performance of your Spark job and reduce the time it takes to fetch the table (currently 10 hours), you can adjust various configurations related to resource allocation and data processing. Here’s how some key configurations can be changed and their impact:

Key Configurations to Modify

1. Number of Executors (spark.executor.instances)

Current setting: 4

Recommendation: Increase the number of executors if your cluster has more available nodes or resources. Increasing executors allows you to distribute the workload across more workers, potentially speeding up processing. However, adding too many executors can lead to resource contention, so ensure you don't exceed the available cluster capacity.



2. Executor Memory (spark.executor.memory)

Current setting: 3 GB

Recommendation: Increase the memory if you are dealing with large datasets. More memory allows executors to cache more data in memory, reducing disk I/O and making operations faster. For example, increase this to 4 GB or 5 GB if your cluster can handle it.

Impact: More memory can reduce shuffling and spilling to disk during large operations, which can significantly boost performance.



3. Number of Cores per Executor (spark.executor.cores)

Current setting: Not specified (usually defaults to 1 or 2 per executor)

Recommendation: Specify this configuration based on your cluster capacity. Increasing the number of cores per executor allows each executor to handle more tasks in parallel. A good practice is to assign 4-5 cores per executor, but make sure you leave some headroom for the cluster's YARN NodeManager.

Example: config("spark.executor.cores", "4")

Impact: More cores per executor mean that each executor can handle more parallel tasks, which reduces the overall execution time.



4. Executor-Task Distribution (spark.sql.shuffle.partitions)

Current setting: Defaults to 200 (unless explicitly set)

Recommendation: Adjust the number of partitions according to your data size and cluster capacity. For large datasets, increase the shuffle partitions, e.g., 400 or 500. However, for smaller datasets, reducing the number of partitions can improve efficiency.

Example: config("spark.sql.shuffle.partitions", "400")

Impact: This configuration controls how data is split across tasks. More partitions result in better parallelism but may increase overhead, so fine-tuning is crucial.



5. YARN Queue (spark.yarn.queue)

Current setting: "default"

Recommendation: If your organization uses multiple queues, allocate your job to a high-priority queue to access more resources faster.

Impact: If the default queue is overloaded, moving to a less-busy queue can speed up resource allocation and job execution.




Steps to Adjust Configurations

Here’s how you can modify your current configuration:

spark = pyspark.sql.SparkSession.builder.master("yarn").appName("csv_pyspark") \
    .config("spark.executor.instances", "8") \  # Increase the number of executors
    .config("spark.executor.memory", "5g") \    # Increase memory per executor
    .config("spark.executor.cores", "4") \      # Assign more cores per executor
    .config("spark.sql.shuffle.partitions", "400") \  # Increase shuffle partitions
    .config("spark.yarn.queue", "high_priority") \    # Use a high-priority queue
    .enableHiveSupport().getOrCreate()

Performance Impact

Reducing Fetch Time: Increasing the number of executors, memory, and cores will allow the job to process more data in parallel, reducing the time taken to fetch tables. For example, if the table fetching operation is heavily I/O-bound or involves large shuffling, these changes could potentially reduce the time by 30-50%, depending on the cluster’s capabilities and the data structure.

Testing and Tuning: You’ll need to test these configurations iteratively. Start by doubling the executors and increasing memory slightly. If performance improves but still takes too long, continue adjusting the shuffle partitions or cores.


If the job's inefficiency comes from excessive shuffling or data skew, tuning partitioning and data distribution might yield further improvements. Monitoring your job with tools like the Spark UI or YARN Resource Manager will provide insights into where bottlenecks occur (e.g., task stragglers, memory issues).

